## Assessing the reproducibility of microbiome data analysis

Today’s most significant health care concerns include the treatment and prevention of obesity, diabetes, autism, antibacterial resistance, cancer, eczema, periodontitis, bacterial vaginisis, and a growing list of other “Diseases of affluence”. There is growing sentiment that the bacteria that live in and on the human body (i.e. the human microbiota) and the environment they inhabit (i.e. the human microbiome) are at least partially involved in these diseases (1–3). One hypothesis is that changes in diet and hygiene have altered our microbiota leading to the increased prevalence of these disorders (4, 5). Clearly, the human microbiome and the conditions and diseases it affects have profound implications for public policy and health care. Fueled by the decreasing costs of DNA sequencing and significant investments by the US National Institutes of Health and private foundations (e.g. Reference 6), the study of the human microbiome has exploded over the past 15 years. In 2010, 78 papers were published that included the keywords “microbiota” or “microbiome”. In 2014, there were over 4,000. Over the past 10 years the median annual increase in number of publications in the microbiome research space has been 36% while has only been 5% for cancer. Although there is considerable excitement about this new area of research, there is also healthy skepticism that many of the claims made by its proponents are exaggerated (7, 8).
This explosion has created a unique scientific environment. Microbiologists who have been classically trained as reductionist molecular biologists are now expected to be molecular ecologists integrating the tools of statistics, bioinformatics, ecology, and clinical science. For the past 13 years we have developed software that is now the most widely used software package in the field and worked with numerous researchers. Our experience suggests that many new researchers face considerable difficulties implementing analysis plans in a manner that is reproducible. Furthermore, because novices do not have the ability to discriminate between competing methods, they may not perform the ideal methods. Even when analyses are done well, it is common for a series of complex data manipulation steps distilled to a single sentence in the methods section of a paper. Obviously, the field needs to assess the overall reproducibility and robustness of published data analyses and it needs to create a mechanism to better train novice researchers.
The Arnold Foundation has a special interest in “Research Integrity” and understanding how problems with research integrity affect public health policy. We are confident that this project fits within the mission of the foundation. As outlined above, the human microbiome is central to many issues in current public health discussions. The mission of the proposed project would be to assess the reproducibility of microbiome research by training researchers in the best current practices that improve reproducibility. To achieve our goals, we propose the following objectives:

* Objective 1. Assess the level of methodological transparency of microbiome studies

* Objective 2. Quantify the ability of researchers to reproduce reported analyses

* Objective 3. Determine whether similar microbiome studies validate each other

Together, these objectives will allow us to assess whether microbiome research has a reproducibility problem. As outlined below, we will achieve these objectives by engaging the microbiome research community. Given the significant role of the microbiome in human health improving the reliability of the results form the proposed research will have a meaningful positive impact.
